Hey everyone, I'm Chris Crow, campus pastor for Crossway Christian Church's Millford campus here in Southern New Hampshire, where our mission is all about practicing the way of Jesus together as we pursue God, build community, and unleash compassion.
I pray that what you hear today will help you experience God more deeply and live more and more like Jesus.
I love our Experiencing Psalm 23 series.
It's been a while together.
I think it might be eight, nine weeks.
It's been a while.
I love mostly the word at the beginning of it called experiencing.
I'm an experiential kind of guy.
Now, when I first got saved, it was more cerebral.
It was more doctrine theology, and I still love doctrine and theology.
If you go into my office over there, you'll see that that library has been built around theology.
But then it got to the point where it's like, I want to experience you beyond just cerebral.
Not that that he bypasses our mind, but then he wants us to have these moments with him, these encounters with him.
And so we've been in Psalm 23, which is probably one of the most famous of all sections of scripture, other than John 3 16, right?
You ever seen that guy with the big sign at NFL games?
Boom.
So that's a very popular verse, but I'm talking about a section of scripture that is very well known, Psalm 23.
We need to experience it regularly.
And to experience as I prayed, God as shepherd, we need to trust Him.
Amen?
You gotta trust God and keep trusting Him.
That's what we looked at last Lord's day.
Now we're going to talk about humility or humbling ourselves.
So let me ask you a question.
Are you a humble person?
Raise your hand.
Trick question.
Oh, I don't mean to put you on the spot.
What is humility?
Someone once said it's not thinking less of yourself, but thinking of yourself less.
Some of my heroes are the Puritans.
I've quoted some.
I'm gonna quote one now.
Thomas Watson said, a humble soul is emptied of all swelling thoughts of himself.
You ever had swelling thoughts of yourself?
That's an interesting way to put it, isn't it?
What is humility?
I know humility is hard to hold on to.
I know for me, I've asked the Lord many years ago, make me a humble person.
Oh boy, that's a scary prayer.
It's like asking the Lord for patience, right?
Ask the Lord for humility and watch what happens in your life.
And so I started buying book after book after book after book on humility.
And so humility to me is like the watermelon that used to have seeds.
Remember those watermelons?
Now it's like no more seeds.
What happened to all the seeds?
And so as an image here I want you to see, think about this.
My parents would say after I got done spitting out all the seeds on the ground or the floor to pick up all the seeds.
And so I try to pick it up and what would happen when I grab it with my fingers?
It would whip, it would whip, you know, it just kind of slips out.
That's the way humility is.
Sometimes we're going to think that we're humble, that we have it, we have a grasp on humility, but we know them because before you know it, it's gone.
And then the swelling thoughts come back, right?
And so we're going to talk about humility.
What's the opposite of humility?
Everybody?
What is it?
Pride.
It's pride.
I'm going back to Thomas Watson now.
I just want to quote him again.
He said this, it is a spiritual drunkenness.
It flies up like wine into the brain and intoxicates it.
Pride.
Let me just define pride in a different kind of way because I think some people get mislabeled or stereotyped if they're a confident person, then you think they're a prideful person, not necessarily.
You can be confident this morning if your confidence is in Christ, if it's in the cross, if it's in Jesus.
If your identity is then understood in and through the relationship that you have with Christ and you're a confident person, then you're not going to be comparing yourself to others.
That's different.
But if you're a prideful person, you put yourself up on a pedestal and then you try to lower everybody else around you because you need to feel good about yourself.
You see, that's all coming from a place of insecurity.
But I don't want to use the word insecurity.
I don't want to get too psychology on you.
I want to say pride.
That's a better word for it.
That's a more biblical word for it than insecurity.
And so let's talk about this.
Let's talk about being prideful.
Now, I do want to mention briefly that it's okay to be proud of something.
You're proud of your child, I would imagine.
Your child does something in school that's really great and you're proud as a parent or if you're a young person and you do something really well, you know, you're proud of that.
Lee Greenwood has a song called God Bless the USA, right?
I have some lyrics here, notice it, it says this, I am proud to be an American.
I don't sound like Lee Greenwood, I'm not saying that.
But I just want you to see that it's okay to be proud in that sense, proud to be an American.
You know, it's not pride.
That's not what we're talking about here.
Pride is when you separate yourself from God, you try to be independent.
We are in such an independent, autonomous kind of culture in America.
You go to other countries and this whole thing, the way we think here is really not.
People are like, whoa, what do you guys think over there?
We're so autonomous.
I can be so independent from
from anything and anyone and even God that gets into our mind.
That would be pride.
That I can live my life separated from God.
And so if you're not a Christian this morning, and I wasn't a Christian, 19 I became a Christian.
But before that, if you are, I think, Chris, do you need Jesus?
I would be like, I'm doing pretty good on my own.
What is that, everybody?
It's pride.
I'm separating myself from God.
I don't need the gospel.
I don't need Jesus in my life.
That's what we're talking about.
If Jesus is gonna be the shepherd, Psalm 23, and he's gonna be all sufficient for you and I, then we have to do a couple of things.
And we'll look at a third thing in a couple of weeks.
We have to keep trusting him.
Keep trusting God.
And then keep humbling yourself before him.
So can we talk about that?
Did I say turn to Matthew chapter 16?
Please go there.
Matthew chapter 16.
We're gonna look at verses one down to verse 28.
28 verses in a matter of a short amount of time together.
We're going to try to do this.
Now, I got through it in the first service, and I prayed that it was a blessing.
I think the Holy Spirit was moving in a very unique way in the first service as we went through 28 verses together.
And I felt like I was a little bit on more of a time schedule, but here it's not so.
So my message could go an hour and a half.
Who knows?
This could really go out there quite a ways, because where are you guys going?
Right?
Going down to the oval and have some lunch or something.
But Matthew 16, 1 to 20, I've titled this Y Pride.
makes Psalm 27 just a plaque on the wall.
I have some artwork.
My wife and I have artwork, Bible artwork.
I'm talking of scripture on the walls.
You buy these things at Morningstar or you get them online, wherever.
And so you put them on your walls.
There's Psalm 23 on many, many, many walls across our world.
Does anybody have Psalm 23 on your wall on a plaque or maybe some piece of artwork or anything?
Nobody.
And the first there was, do you have something?
Yeah, that's awesome.
And so what we want to do is go beyond just the plaque.
We want to go beyond just artwork.
We want to experience Psalm 23.
And to do that, we're going to do humility.
Humility is a tough one to talk about.
So we're going to try to do the best we can.
And I don't want it to be just a plaque on the wall for you.
I want it to be practice.
I want it to be practice in my own life.
There's five principles in Matthew chapter 16, 1 to 28 that I want to share with you.
And we'll go through these one at a time.
And we'll read the text as we get each principle on pride.
Are you ready?
Are you sure?
Are you ready to see some pride?
I didn't think that one was too big of a reaction that one.
Okay, we'll see Holy Spirit.
What do you want to do in us?
Number one, here it is.
Verse one, pride tries to presume on the precepts of God.
This is what pride does.
It's in verses one to four.
Pride tries to presume on the precepts of God.
Verse one, if you'll follow along with me, I'm going to read the text out loud and you can look at it with your eyes.
And Pharisees and the Sadducees came and
They came to test him, and they asked him to show them a sign from heaven.
And he answered them, when it is evening, you say it will be fair weather, for the sky is red, and in the morning it will be stormy today, for the sky is red and threatening.
You know how to interpret the appearance of the sky, but you cannot interpret the signs of the times.
What would be the signs of the times he's talking about here?
Just throw it out there.
What do you think it is?
Signs of the times.
The arrival of the Son of God, of the Messiah.
of Jesus.
You'll see Peter confess Christ in a moment.
And he got that from the Holy Spirit, it was supernatural.
And so the signs of the times is the arrival of Christ, that their Messiah is actually here among them.
And so, but they didn't know that, right?
They couldn't interpret the signs of the times.
And the evil and adulterous generation of verse four says, seeks for a sign, but no sign will be given to it except the sign of Jonah.
And that would be what?
What would that be?
The sign of Jonah.
Three days and three nights in the belly of a fish.
So the son of man, Jesus said about himself will be in the earth.
Three days and three nights.
He was talking about the resurrection.
You want a sign?
That's gonna be a great sign.
But I'm not gonna give you a sign now.
Why wouldn't he give them a sign?
Why wouldn't he do that?
Well, because their motive was all off.
And we'll see some of that as we go through this.
And so he left them, it says, and departed from them.
Here's the first one, pride.
Pride tries to presume on the precepts of God.
Verse 1 says, and Matthew is recording the arrival of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
They were a religious sect.
In fact, they never got along.
The Pharisees believed much more spiritual than the Sadducees did, and Sadducees would have denied a physical resurrection.
The Pharisees believed in that kind of thing.
Pharisees would really adhere to the law, I mean to the point.
But the Sadducees were a little bit more on the
More of a rationalist and then the other would be more of a ritualist.
So the Pharisees are ritualistic and the Sadducees are more rationalistic.
They'll explain away the supernatural.
It didn't happen and all that kind of thing.
And so they never got along.
But here in the text, it says the Pharisees and the Sadducees came together.
Watch this.
This is how diabolical pride is because both groups are prideful.
And then when they want to attack Christ and come against Christ, they actually unite and collaborate.
Watch prideful people.
They're gonna collaborate with other people to come against you possibly, or the enemy's gonna cause you to go, you know what?
I just wanna get some other people in my corner, and so that I can defeat that other person.
And you're gonna collaborate based on pride in your own heart, and that's something we definitely don't want.
So this is an interesting arrival of Pharisees and Sadducees.
Religious people are prideful people.
I'm not gonna use the word religious anymore.
I could, it would be very much in the context of what we're talking about.
I'm gonna use the word prideful.
prideful people are suspicious a lot.
They seek to test you.
And when they seek to test you, they want you to pass or fail.
To fail.
Because they can't have you further ahead than them or over them.
And so they're going to test you.
This is a suspicious person.
Anyway, it says that in the text.
They came to test him.
And why were they doing that?
They wanted to discredit Jesus.
They wanted to, Jesus to show them a sign and Jesus answers them by saying that he says this in the text, you know how to interpret the appearance of the sky.
In other words, you can't interpret the word of God.
Now hold onto this thought here because pride will keep us from understanding who the word of God is.
Not only what the word of God is, but who the word of God is.
Here you have Jesus Christ himself, face to face with the Pharisees and Sadducees.
And they're not getting it.
They're not discerning it.
And he references the weather.
He references looking at the weather and being able to tell.
I have an app on my phone.
It's amazing.
I could tell what the weather is because of satellites and all that kind of thing.
It's really quite fascinating to think about it.
In that day, they didn't have that.
They didn't pull out their iPhone or whatever phone they have and then look at their weather app.
They would look up into the sky.
So I'm going to try to test you now and see if you can discern the signs of the times or the weather by looking at these images.
So if you pull up the first image, you'll see that it's a very threatening sky, correct?
And so if you saw that sky, you saw those clouds up in the air and you had about 18 holes of golf there in the afternoon, would you think that you're going to be able to fulfill that 18 holes of golf?
No, because you'd be looking up in the sky thinking, oh, there's a storm coming.
I'm rained out.
I'm not going to the beach today.
I'm not going to the picnic today.
Because you're reading the sky.
You're reading the weather.
Next one, if you saw this particular sky, you'd be like, what?
Hey, we're gonna be able to get together today.
We're gonna have a lot of fun.
It's not gonna be canceled.
The ball game's still on.
They were able to do that with the weather, but they couldn't even tell that Jesus, the son of God, the Messiah is right before them.
So Jesus then goes, presses in on here and he says, you can't even interpret.
Pride is not gonna allow us to interpret correctly.
Any of us.
So when pride is working inside of our heart and in our mind and it's in our soul and it's really attacking us in some way, maybe it's coming in and out of somewhere, that place in your heart, you're gonna have a hard time interpreting the word of God and the work of God and the person of God.
This is what's going on here.
Sign of Jonah is in the resurrection and he brings that to their bare on their mind.
And so you'll have a, you'll have a,
sign, it's going to be the resurrection.
I just wondered when some of those Pharisees, probably after Jesus rose from the dead, did they ever believe on him?
I don't know specifically.
I know you have people like Nicodemus and others that believed in Christ, but you wonder how many statistically actually confess Jesus as a result of the resurrection.
But it certainly was a sign, a powerful sign.
So do you have a biblical blind spot?
That would be the issue here.
This is the person that thinks they know the word of God.
They might have a verse in their head.
They might even think they have some truth.
But the pride inside of their heart then is causing them to really presume upon the word of God.
And so I've done that.
I don't know.
I'm just being honest with you.
There are times in my Christian life in 40 years.
I spell every 40 years in the Lord the other day.
It was Thursday.
I was 40 years old in the Lord.
I couldn't believe it.
I was like, wow.
You know, in that 40 years, there have been times that I've done this.
And not proudly, not that kind of proud.
And so I just don't know where you're at and what has happened in your world, too.
Do you do that?
I think we all do at various times.
And this is what pride will do inside of all of our hearts.
And we need to be very careful of that.
We have blind spots.
Do you have a blind spot?
Anybody have blind spots here?
You're saying, no, not me.
Oh, really?
OK. Well, we can talk about pride.
Hey, we are.
We're preaching on it right now.
It's perfect.
OK, number two.
Pride tries to perplex our perception of God.
This is number two in verses five down to verse 12.
I'll repeat that.
Pride tries to perplex our perception of God.
Notice the text with me verse five when the disciples reached the other side.
They had forgotten to bring any bread, and Jesus said to them, watch and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
He brings in leaven, other places of scripture.
Leaven is referred to as hypocrisy.
That word leaven.
And so he's gonna define it specifically what it is.
But he says, watch and beware.
Verse seven, and they began discussing it among themselves saying, we brought no bread, but Jesus aware of this said, oh, you have little faith.
Why are you discussing among yourselves the fact that you have no bread?
Do you not yet perceive?
Interesting.
Good question.
Do you not yet perceive?
You do not remember the five loaves for the 5,000, how many baskets you gathered?
Were the seven loaves for the 4,000, and how many baskets you gathered?
How is it that you failed to understand that I did not speak about bread?
Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
Then they understood that he did not tell them to be aware of the leaven of bread, but of the teaching, the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
Perplexed.
Look out.
He says, beware.
Watch out for.
I'm sure you've had someone in your world say that to you.
They know that you're going to harm yourself if you keep going down this certain path.
Keep doing these certain things.
And they're going to say, look out.
Look out.
You probably won't hear the word beware.
When I used to, when I was growing up, me and my brothers would venture into other people's properties, corn fields.
We used to play out in the corn fields all the time.
It was awesome.
And so we would go up into these farm lands where I grew up, and there were signs everywhere, beware, you know, all these things that we would look at.
Did we listen to them?
Yes or no?
No.
We didn't.
And so there was a lot of pride going on there, even as a young kid.
And until one of the owners came out with a shotgun, then we started to realize maybe the pride's not such a good idea.
And we shouldn't be there.
But this is what's happening here.
Look out.
Beware of the leaven.
Watch out for the Pharisees.
They're teaching.
You're gonna wanna go someplace in your walk with Christ, and there's gonna be those prideful people, or maybe pride in your own heart, that's gonna leaven that thing out.
You're not gonna rise up to the places that God has for you, because of pride.
Not just your own pride, but pride is that somebody else has, and they're gonna try to do that against you.
They're gonna try to prevent that kind of thing.
We'll talk a little bit more about that.
But in this second point, I want you to see the confusion.
Jesus is concerned that they're gonna be perplexed.
They're not gonna be able to discern correctly as a result of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
1 Corinthians chapter 14 verse 33 that Paul said that God isn't the author of confusion, right?
Watch this, anywhere you go, if there's confusion in the mixed.
If there's a situation at work in your home, in a church, anywhere where there's confusion, because that's not the will of the Lord.
The will of the Lord is clarity.
The will of the Lord is to be able to see and have vision.
You know, to understand that kind of thing.
And so if you're walking in some kind of confusion, you can always tie that back to pride somehow.
Watch it, just peel back the layers on that.
Next time you're in that situation, just start going, okay, God, help me to see this, help me to walk in through this and understand it and separate it out.
God's not the author of confusion.
And Jesus is saying that there's some really cool things going on.
In fact, I'm right here in front of you and you're not getting it.
That's what he's saying to them.
This is what pride does.
You could be in a church service like this right now or something could be happening in the nation where God is at work and doing incredible cool things and you're not seeing it.
Your perception's off.
Church at least and I were a part of for many years and God was working in just incredible ways.
It was obvious, it was evidential that God was moving.
People are getting born again, baptisms, growing, discipleship, impacting the community.
Everything was happening that you would think when God is showing up and he did marvelous works.
And then there was this man in the church that came against that.
And this man challenged it and this man denied it and he caused divisiveness amongst the people of God.
What was happening there?
Well, the man was struggling with pride.
Pride.
It happens to all of us though.
It can happen to all of us.
Number three, pride tries to pervert the person of God, verse 13 down to verse 20.
I wanted to find pervert, to alter from its original course, to distort what was first intended.
That's the word pervert.
And we're gonna see this in verse 13.
If you read with me, I'll read out loud.
Now, when Jesus came into the district of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, who do people say that the son of man is?
It's one of the most popular designations that Jesus liked about himself, the son of man.
very important to be called the son of men, because he's going to try to help them understand that he's not just God, he's in human form.
And so that would have been really hard for somebody like the Sadducees to grab ahold of, and they battled with that.
And the Pharisees did in different kinds of ways.
Verse 14, they said, some say, John the Baptist, others say, Elijah and others Jeremiah are one of the prophets.
He said to them, but who do you say that I am?
And Simon Peter replied, you are at the Christ, the son of the living God.
Way to go, Peter.
This is awesome.
I mean, this is a tremendous confession.
Jesus answered in verse 17, blessed are you Simon Barjona for flesh and blood has not revealed this to you, but my father who is in heaven.
In other words, supernaturally.
And I tell you, you are Peter and on this rock, I'll build my church and the gates of hell are not prevailed against it.
That's not endorsement for Catholicism.
That's not the church is built on Peter.
It's built on the confession of Peter.
It's built on the truth of the word of God about Jesus Christ.
The church is built on Jesus.
And so it's what he's talking about there.
That's a very controversial text of scripture, but I think it's pretty easy to understand when you look at it from that angle.
I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven.
And some people would say that's Pentecost when he got up and he preached and the church was launched right there.
That was Peter who did that.
And so whatever you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, whatever you loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.
And then he strictly charged the disciples to tell no one that he was the Christ.
Timing of God.
So what is the perversion of the person of God here?
Well, I like how Peter answers correctly.
And again, that was because the Holy Spirit revealed that to him.
But what we have here is a distortion and minimization of Jesus.
And this is what pride will do.
This is when pride is operating.
And so I can say this in the second service, there've been many, many people coming through the first service that I've had contact with, had conversation with.
And even since being here,
And these people are very sincere in the fact that they do not know Jesus.
Now that's not a bad thing.
You gotta know that you're lost before you can be found.
And so you gotta come and look at yourself and go, wait a minute, I'm not in, I'm out.
I've not repented, I've not become a Christian.
And so they have these very frank conversations with me.
And so then I bring them right to Jesus.
You bring them right to the cross.
You talk about repentance, you talk about faith in Him alone.
and all of that.
And so inevitably, a lot of these people, not just recently, in all the years of leadership and ministry, when I ask the same kinds of questions, and when the person looks at Jesus and they just say something like, well, he's just a good teacher, maybe a good example, maybe on par with Harry Krishna or Muhammad or Gandhi or some of those other religious leaders, then I know that there's some pride operating there.
You can see pride move out of the way, supernaturally, when Jesus Christ then is exalted and He is elevated.
And then the person goes right to Him.
Just like that man I told you about earlier, when he was praying, he was praying to a higher power.
But when he brought it in specifically into Jesus, that's when the miracles started to happen.
You see, it has to be about Jesus.
There are people that want God as their Father, but they don't want Jesus as the Savior.
And Jesus says, you got to believe, if you want to believe in the Father truly, then you have to believe in me.
It all goes together.
There's this perversion going on here of the person of God, of Jesus, and they don't see it.
And I believe that we need to see Jesus for who he is.
It'll always be about Jesus, right?
So you come to Crossway, Milford, and we talk about God, God, God, God, God.
And that's good.
We talk about the Holy Spirit, and that's good.
But you don't hear about Jesus.
You don't hear him prayed in his name.
I think we should pray in Jesus' name.
You're saying, well, you're so hung up on formulas.
I'm not hung up on formulas, I'm hung up on a name.
There's power in that name.
There's a purpose behind that.
That's why we're supposed to do that in Jesus' name, in Jesus' name.
And so I would encourage you, because I've heard a lot of Christians that I never pray with Jesus at the end.
They don't.
And I'm like, uh-oh.
And usually over time, I can see something unfold in their life spiritually, not in a very favorable way.
Because it's always about Jesus.
It's in his name.
Number four.
Pride tries to prevent the purposes of God.
Now this goes back to Peter in verse 21, if you'll look there.
From that time Jesus began to show us disciples that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer many things from the elders and the chief priests and scribes and be killed.
This is a shocking statement.
This would stun anybody.
Anybody, like you and I, if we were following Jesus, ate with him, slept around the fire with him, had conversations into the night with him and all of a sudden he says, I'm gonna go to Jerusalem, I gotta go there because I'm gonna be killed.
I mean, that would have stunned down the third day be raised.
There's the hope.
Of course, they didn't get that initially.
Verse 22, and Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him.
He's rebuking Jesus, really?
It's like he's going to coach Jesus on what to do and how to do it.
He took him aside and began to rebuke him, saying, far be it from you, Lord.
This shall never happen to you.
What?
No, Jesus came to die.
He came to die in a cross.
You don't want to try to stop that.
Who's behind this?
Notice verse 23, but he turned and he said to Peter, get behind me, who?
Satan.
You know what Jesus is doing?
He's looking right through Peter to the other side of him.
Do you know, there have been times in my life where Jesus looked with a penetrating look right through me and behind it is the enemy.
Fill in my mouth, my attitude, my behavior, something.
The times that I've been like that with my wife,
You know, I'm sure Jesus looking at me is looking through me and he's saying the enemy.
What are you doing, Chris?
Let the enemy come in here and use pride to do this between you and Lisa.
That's just being honest with you.
Those kind of things happen.
Now, I wouldn't encourage you going around saying that your spouse is demon possessed.
See, you're up the devil.
That's why you're acting like that.
I can see that happening.
I'll be getting an email and it'll be like, well, hold on.
Let's just try to understand what's going on in the text.
Don't get too hyper over this.
You are a hindrance, verse 23.
You're a hindrance to me.
For you are not setting your mind on the things of God, but on the things of man.
Stay vertical.
I'll use the word vertical around here.
A lot vertical, vertical.
Glory, glory.
Not horizontal.
This is what happened to Peter.
Anytime you're struggling in this horizontal world and you're staying down here and you're not going vertical, then you're probably struggling with some pride somewhere.
Always keep it vertical.
This is what he's talking about here.
preventing the purposes of God.
He must go to Jerusalem, that's what he said.
And then Peter took him aside, far be it from you, Lord, this shall never happen to you.
Here's Peter struggling with pride.
It's not like, oh, Lord, I love you, Lord, I don't want you to leave me, Lord, no, it's not, it's not it.
It's really not, I thought that for a long time.
Then I'm looking at it closer and I'm like, wait a minute.
He read right through Peter, it was Satan.
There must have been something going on there, not in the very favorable way for Peter.
What would Peter do later?
He would deny the Lord, right?
And then all the rest of them would.
All of that is just pride.
And Peter's here struggling with it.
Let me bring a little bit more practical.
Pride is in us and we'll try to prevent the purposes of God.
If I have pride in my heart, do you know that I can attempt to prevent the purposes of God from being worked out in your life?
Do you know you got to be careful when you're interacting with other people that you love them sincerely and genuinely?
That there's not this pride in sign.
Because if there's this pride inside, then you're really not going to want them to thrive.
You're not going to want them to fulfill all that God has for them.
This gets dangerous.
Now this is happening a lot in Christianity and in the church.
And I don't want to see that happen at CM for any, anyway.
And so we want to exalt God.
We want to help people.
to be all that God has called them to be and fulfill the purposes of God.
And so we don't need to be about belittling anybody or mistreating other people because of jealousy and envy.
And I totally get the whole insecurity thing.
I totally get all of the things that we can battle with.
And what we need to unpack our bags.
How about we just say it like that?
Everybody's got baggage.
And so we have to unpack our bags.
And if you're that insecure as a person, and then you're going to try to help or not help, but really hurt somebody next to you,
Whoever that person may be, fulfilling the purposes of God, then have the Holy Spirit do something inside.
Because that is not the place that we need to be in.
It's awfully quiet in here.
Let's move on, one more.
Number five, pride tries to profit from the provision of God.
Verse 24 to 28, and this will be the end of this outline.
Verse 24, if you look there, then Jesus told us disciples, if anyone would come after me, let them deny himself, take up his cross,
and follow me.
And for whoever would save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake will find it.
And for what will profit a man, there it is, if he gains the whole world and forfeits his own soul.
Or what shall a man give and return for his soul?
For the Son of Man is going to come with his angels in the glory of his father, and then he will repay each person according to what he has done.
Truly, I say to you, there are some standing here who will not taste death until they see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom.
pride tries to profit from the provision.
God has provided, who is he ultimately provided but himself?
I remember driving a car many, many years ago, having a prayer drive, and I was really going through the valley of the shadow of death.
It was rough.
And so I said to the law, I said, Lord, what am I going to get out of all of this?
Why am I going through this?
Why are Lisa and I going through?
It wasn't a marital thing, our marriage was strong, so it was beyond that.
I don't want you to think that the marriage thing was being under attack, although it has been under attack through the years, but this wasn't it.
And so I'm praying to the Lord, and I said, Lord, what am I going to get out of this?
And he said, you're going to get me.
That's what you're going to get.
And I'm just balling.
You're enough.
You're sufficient.
Remember, we're talking about sufficiency here.
The Lord is my shepherd.
I shall not want.
And so if I'm wanting the world or if I'm wanting all these other things and not Jesus Christ himself, then I'm not in a good spot.
And that's pride.
That's all that connects to.
And so here's the teaching here.
Jesus is saying deny.
deny, not forget yourself, but deny yourself.
And I remember during that season of my life writing in my journal, Lord, I feel like I have to die a thousand deaths.
I still keep my journals.
I looked at them the other day, 30 years of keeping a journal.
So I have lots of them.
And so I go back through those and you'll see in those journals that I say, I don't want to die today, like to myself, not physically or anything like that.
I don't want to alarm anybody.
We've got some young people in the room.
It's not that, it's denying myself.
I had to deny and die to myself.
That's a pride issue.
And so I said, well, I don't want to do that anymore.
And what do you say to me?
Do you know?
Okay, you don't have to die anymore.
Is that what he said?
No, he's going, you have to keep doing this.
As long as you're in this body, this flesh, because my flesh wants to take the provision of God and consume it upon my flesh, my fallenness.
We don't want that, that's pride.
Verse 26, he said, what would it profit a man if he gains the whole world and loses his soul?
So in conclusion, for us to experientially say that the Lord is my shepherd, we'll have to trust the shepherd.
Trust him.
Keep trusting him and keep humbling yourself before him.
Make the choice.
You know humility is a choice.
Did you know that?
We can either choose to be prideful or humble.
And I want to choose humility.
Do you want to choose humility?
Amen?
Uh-oh.
There wasn't too many hands that went up on that one.
That should be 100%, right?
It should be 100%.
There's something I want to show you.
It's called the triangle of sufficiency, and I'll bring it to a close.
It's wonderful.
You start with trust or faith, and then it goes to humility.
This place of denying yourself as we looked at Jesus saying here to them, and then it moves over to love.
And we'll talk about love in a couple of weeks.
together, the triangle of sufficiency.
How do we have a sufficient relationship with God?
How is Jesus really the shepherd of our life in a total and complete perfect sense of the word?
You need faith.
You need trusting.
That's the word I'll use there.
And then humility.
Both of those are necessary and important.
So I'm gonna ask you a question.
Do you trust him and are you humbling yourself before him?
This is what Dave Ripper said and I love it.
It's a great quote
Our lead pastor said, greater trust leads to greater humility.
Greater humility leads to greater love.
Greater love leads to greater trust, and it just keeps going.
It's so good.
Let's just keep doing these things, and you'll see the sufficiency of the shepherd.
And we can say, the Lord is my shepherd.
I shall not want.
The Lord hates pride.
Psalm 23, I'm sorry, Psalm 73, verse 6 says, pride is their necklace.
I'm not a big jewelry guy.
I don't wear necklaces.
I usually wear a watch.
I don't wear necklaces, but this is interesting.
And so these people, prideful people, it's like they want to show off their bling bling.
You don't want to show off pride as the bling bling.
And so this is what the psalmist said.
Proverbs 29, 23 says, one's pride will bring him low.
The prophet Isaiah 2, 11 said, the lofty pride of man shall be brought low.
Humble yourselves.
I think it was James that said, just humble yourself before the Lord and he'll lift you up.
It might have been Peter, I'm sorry if I got that wrong.
I think both of them talked about humility and so trusting.
Okay, here's the application test.
Are you ready?
You'll see it on the screen.
Application test, how often do you pray?
How often?
And so if you're praying without ceasing, you're probably trusting without ceasing.
Paul said trust without or constantly pray without ceasing, pardon me.
So if you're trusting the Lord, are you praying a whole lot?
Do they go together?
Yeah.
And so if you're not praying a whole lot, if you're praying like once a week or maybe every other day or, you know, that kind of thing, then you're probably not trusting a lot.
So just watch your prayer life.
That's how you watch that.
And then the other thing is how secret are we?
And this is an interesting text.
I have no idea.
I'm going to try to read it.
It's very small.
We'll make it larger next time.
So Jesus says, so that you're giving may be in secret and your father who sees in secret will reward you.
And when you pray, you must not be like the hypocrites, for they love to stand and pray in the synagogues and at the street corners.
Who are the hypocrites he's talking about?
Anybody know?
Yeah, there's religious leaders that we saw in chapter 16 that they may be seen by others.
Yeah, we don't want that.
Truly, I say to you, they have to receive their reward.
And when you pray, go into your room and shut the door and pray to your father who is in secret.
And your father who sees in secret will reward you.
Your fasting may not be seen by others, but by your father who is in secret, and your father who sees in secret rewards.
How good at you at secret spirituality?
We're not parading this kind of thing.
We're not announcing it.
Don't be the hero of your own story.
That's something that I learned in Chicago when I was out there with them, Harvest Bible Chapel.
We were taught that over and over again.
Don't be the hero of your own story.
So if you want to tell a story, I'm not saying be self-deprecating.
Don't beat yourself down, that kind of thing.
But try not to be more secretive about some of those things that that's what he's talking about there.
So there's our application test.
How about we pray together?
Lord, we thank you for your word.
We thank you, Lord, that you're a God who is completely and perfectly in love with us.
And so we just thank you.
We receive all that you have for us.
You are truly a sufficient shepherd.
And so Lord, we know that even though I walked through the valley of the shadow of death, I'll feel no evil.
And so Lord, we pray that you would help us to realize that pride can get in the way of this.
And we don't want that.
And we want to be humble people.
And so we choose humility.
And we pray that you would continuously work this in us as Christians.
And so Lord, we honor you, we give you glory, we praise your name.
It's a tough word, your word on pride.
We don't like to see pride.
God, if there's a blind spot in my life, in our lives, in our church as a whole,
Please reveal it.
We don't want this to be a part of who we are.
No pride.
And, Lord, if there's any pride that we're getting right now, just even having conversations with people after first service, people were confessing it, maybe we need to confess it right now.
And I see it in my heart.
Please, Lord, forgive me for pride.
That might be you this morning.
Help us not to have Christianity that we parade our spirituality.
We don't want to do that.
Help us to have more secretive parts of our life.
When it comes to giving, when it comes to fasting, when it comes to all of these other things, Lord, we don't need to be the hero of our own story.
May you be the hero of our story.
That's it.
That's the answer.
May you be the hero of our story.
And so we honor you in Jesus' mighty name.
Let's continue to worship with one more song.
Thanks for listening to the Crossway Christian Church's Middleford Campus Sermon podcast.
If you like to plug into the life of our community or have any questions that we might be able to answer, visit our website at crosswayscc.org to connect with us.
Until next time, we can be with you.
May the Lord bless you and keep you.